The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fifteen Institute Lessons in Language,
Arithmetic, and U.S. History, by W. F. L. Sanders

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Fifteen Institute Lessons in Language, Arithmetic, and U.S. History

Author: W. F. L. Sanders

Release Date: June 28, 2016 [EBook #52429]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTEEN INSTITUTE LESSONS ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, ellinora and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                           Transcriber’s Note

  Missing or inconsistent punctuation made consistent.
  Obvious typos corrected.
  Language Lessons:
    ‘Kind’ in item 13. on p. 4 has been italicized to be consistent with
      other italicized words in the sentence.
    Line breaks have been added to separate the individual Exercises for
      Correction to make them easier to read.
  Arithmetic Lessons:
    Problem numbers jump from 14 to 16; 15 is not labeled.
  History Lessons:
    The Presidential Terms are not in chronological order - they have
      been kept as printed.
  Italic text indicated by underscores surrounding _italic text_.
  Bold text indicated by equal signs surrounding =bold text=.
  Small capitals in original converted to ALL CAPS in text.
  Description of illustrations added to text except for small decorative
    flourishes on the title page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                FIFTEEN
                           INSTITUTE LESSONS

                                  -IN-

                          LANGUAGE, ARITHMETIC

                                 -AND-

                             U. S. HISTORY


                    COPYRIGHT SECURED, AUGUST 1888,

             BY W. F. L. SANDERS, CAMBRIDGE CITY, INDIANA.


                            RICHMOND, IND..
              DAILY PALLADIUM BOOK AND JOB PRINTING HOUSE.
                                 1888.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                GENERAL DIRECTIONS ON TEACHING LANGUAGE.


The teacher should ask questions about the objects and incidents of the
reading lesson; the most difficult words of the lesson should be placed
on the board and used as an exercise in rapid pronunciation and
spelling; let the pupils pass rapidly through a paragraph, pronouncing
the words of two-syllables, three-syllables, etc.; and, as soon as the
advancement of the class will permit, the pupil should pass through a
paragraph naming the parts of speech, the phrases, the propositions, and
the sentences, now and then classifying them.

Frequently, as a pupil reads, the rest of the class should be required
to close their books and turn their attention directly to what is being
read; when the reader is through, the teacher should question the
listeners carefully until every point of what was read is brought out
clearly,—the reading itself to be properly criticised. Rules of
punctuation, and those concerning the use of capitals should be deduced
from the reading matter, and frequently recited. Quotation marks, the
hyphen, and the apostrophe must receive their share of attention.

Geographical terms, allusions, and figures of speech should be noted;
let the places mentioned be located and described as in geography. If
prominent men are mentioned, let brief biographical sketches be given.

Before beginning the recitation, the teacher should question the class
closely in regard to what is set forth or told in the lesson. Give
careful attention to position, voice, emphasis, tone, etc. Good reading
should strike our attention as being very like good conversation.

As soon as practicable, the pupils should be required to write out as a
composition the thoughts and incidents of the lesson. Occasional
exercises in parsing and analysis may be given from the reading lesson.

Stories, extracts, etc., should often be read to the class, to be
written out by them in their own language. Let attention to the use of
correct language be a prominent feature of every recitation.
Transformations of easy poems into prose, and descriptions of scenes,
real or imaginary, may be used in composition work. Oral and written
reproductions of reading lesson must occur frequently. Conversations
about familiar and interesting objects will give the teacher an
opportunity to correct bad language.

From time to time, as opportunity offers, supplementary reading matter
may be used. Throughout the grades, two or three times a week, the
pupils should be required to commit choice quotations and to recite them
clearly and effectively.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                      INSTITUTE LESSONS. Language.


            Cautions Against the Use of Incorrect Language.

  1. A verb must agree with its subject in number and person.

  2. Use _either_ or _neither_ with reference to one of two objects.

  3. Use _any one_ or _no one_ with reference to one of more than two
       objects.

  4. _Each_, _every_, _either_, or _neither_ requires a verb or a
       pronoun in the same connection to be in the singular number.

  5. Two or more subjects taken _together_ require a verb or a pronoun
       in the same connection to be in plural number.

  6. Two or more subjects taken _separately_ require a verb or a pronoun
       in the same connection to be in the singular number.

  7. A pronoun must agree with its antecedent in person and number.

  8. When subjects of different numbers are joined by _or_, the verb
       must agree with the one next to it.

  9. _These_ or _those_ should not be used with the singular noun _kind_
       or _sort_.

 10. Use plural nouns with adjectives denoting more than one.

 11. Use _a_ before words beginning with a _consonant_ sound.

 12. Use _an_ before words beginning with a _vowel_ sound.


                       Exercises for Correction.

 (=a=) Nothing but trials await him (1).

 (=b=) Have either of you seen him (4).

 (=c=) Neither of five men were present (3, 1).

 (=d=) Either ignorance or carelessness have caused this (4).

 (=e=) Neither of them were there (4).

 (=f=) Each of the pupils are to bring their books (1, 4).

 (=g=) What is the mood and tense of the following verbs (5)?

 (=h=) Every door and every window were crowded with spectators (6).

 (=i=) Not a boy in the class knew their lessons to-day (7).

 (=j=) Was the boys or their father to go (8)?

 (=k=) I do not like these kind of apples (9).

 (=l=) It isn’t safe to trust those sort of people (9).

 (=m=) The pole is ten foot long (10).

 (=n=) Is he an African or an European (11)?

 (=o=) The government is an hereditary monarchy (11).

 (=p=) A umpire was appointed (12).

 (=q=) Franklin favored an Union (11).


             Cautions Against the Use of Incorrect English.

 13. Use the adjective in expressing _condition_, _appearance_,
       _quality_, or _kind_. (Use the adj. to modify a noun or a
       pronoun.)

 14. Use the adverb in expressing _manner_ or _degree_.

 15. Use _less_ to denote _size_ or _quantity_; use _fewer_ to denote
       number.

 16. _Omit_ the article before a noun used in a _general_ sense.

 17. _Use_ the article before a noun used in a _particular_ sense.

 18. Before two or more words denoting the same object, use the article
       but once.

 19. If the different words denote objects to be distinguished use the
       article with each word.

 20. Place a modifier where it will affect only the element to be
       modified.

 21. Do not use _of_ between _both_ or _all_ and its _noun_.

 22. Use next to the noun the adjective of broadest signification; or,
       the one denoting the quality most easily recognized.

 23. Avoid using an adverb between the parts of an infinitive.


                       Exercises for Correction.

 (=a=) Since he was sick, he looks badly (13).

 (=b=) The rose smells sweetly (13).

 (=c=) I feel queerly (13).

 (=d=) He looks tolerable well (14).

 (=e=) He acted very different from his brother (14).

 (=f=) There was no less than five squirrels on the tree (1, 15).

 (=g=) Such a man does not deserve the name of a gentleman (16).

 (=h=) I do not despise the giver, but gift (17).

 (=i=) She referred to Patrick Henry, the patriot and the orator (18).

 (=j=) What is the difference between a siderial and solar day (19)?

 (=k=) His dexterity almost appeared miraculous (20).

 (=l=) I forgot to sign my name to a letter once (20).

 (=m=) He only rents the store, not the dwelling (20).

 (=n=) Did you bring both of the books (21)?

 (=o=) He saw all of the animals (21).

 (=p=) He was an old respectable man (22).

 (=q=) They tried to thoroughly educate her (23).

 (=r=) Everybody thought that it was destined to be a great city, twenty
        years ago (20).

 (=s=) He examined the trachea, or the windpipe (18).

 (=t=) Not one in ten of them are likely to pass (1).


             Cautions Against the Use of Incorrect English.

 24. Do not neglect to form the possessive case properly.

 25. The apostrophe is not used with the possessive pronouns.

 26. Let the sign of possession be as close as possible to the modified
       noun.

 27. Indicate separate ownership by using the sign with each name.

 28. Indicate joint ownership by using the sign but once.

 29. Avoid the use of two or three possessives in close connection.

 30. When the comparative degree is used the latter term must exclude
       the former.

 31. When the superlative degree is used the latter term must include
       the former.

 32. When the latter term excludes the former the comparative degree
       must be used.

 33. When the latter term includes the former the superlative degree
       must be used.

 34. For two objects use the comparative degree.

 35. For more than two objects use the superlative degree.

 36. When a comparison or contrast is made neither term must


                       Exercises for Correction.

 (=a=) He has childrens’ gloves and mens’ shoes (24).

 (=b=) This is a later edition than your’s (25).

 (=c=) He does not like to ride any one’s else horse (26).

 (=d=) Do you prefer Webster or Worcester’s Dictionary (27)?

 (=e=) He left his bundle at Smith’s and Brown’s Store (28).

 (=f=) That is my brother James’ wife’s youngest sister (29).

 (=g=) He had a better memory than any boy I knew (30).

 (=h=) His paper has the largest circulation of any other in the county
        (31).

 (=i=) He was the most active of his other companions (32).

 (=j=) China has a greater population than any nation on the earth (33 or
        30).

 (=k=) He is the wisest of the two (34).

 (=l=) Which of these three men is the taller (35)?

 (=m=) No city in Canada has suffered so much from fires as Quebec (36).

 (=n=) It is one of the best answers that has yet been given to the
        question (1).

 (=o=) A large part of the exports consist of spices (1).

 (=p=) One after another arose and offered their services (7).

 (=q=) Actions speak plainer than words (14).


             Cautions Against the Use of Incorrect English.

 37. Do not use an objective form in a nominative relation.

 38. Do not use a nominative form in an objective relation.

 39. Avoid the use of the nominative case by pleonasm.

 40. Do not use double comparatives or superlatives.

 41. Avoid modifying adjectives denoting invariable qualities.

 42. Use the past participle in forming the perfect tenses or the
       passive voice.

 43. Do not neglect to use the apostrophe in contracted words.

 44. General or abstract truths should be expressed in the present
       tense.

 45. A hypothetical statement requires the subjunctive form.

 46. Use _that_ to represent an antecedent modified by same, very, all,
       no, or an adjective in the superlative degree.

 47. If a past action is referred to as relatively present (or future)
       the proper tense must be used.

 48. Any two connected parts to which a third part refers or is to be
       applied, should be fitted to receive it in meaning or
       construction.


                       Exercises for Correction.

 (=a=) Whom does he think it could have been (37).

 (=b=) Who do you take me to be (38).

 (=c=) The boys I told you about, they are going to the pond (39).

 (=d=) You should be more firmer (40).

 (=e=) That fact is too universal to be disputed (41).

 (=f=) He had began his sermon before they entered (42).

 (=g=) The lesson was wrote in time (42).

 (=h=) Dont let him know Ive gone (43).

 (=i=) Columbus believed that the earth was round (44).

 (=j=) If I was he I would go (45).

 (=k=) Yonder is the same man who passed (46).

 (=l=) I intended to have written it on Saturday (47).

 (=m=) He never has and probably never will forgive me for deceiving him
        (48).

 (=n=) This stuff is coarser and in every way inferior to the other (48).

 (=o=) In what State did you say that Mt. Adams was (44)?

 (=p=) I expected to have heard from him before this (48). Sufficient
        data has been given to solve it (1).


             Cautions Against the Use of Incorrect English.

 49. In the choice of words use the one that will express the proper
       meaning or modification.

 50. Do not use a double negative to express a negation.

 51. Do not violate the rules for the use of capital letters.

 52. Use “differ _with_” in regard to opinion; “differ _from_” in other
       cases.

 53. Do not use a preposition if a verb can properly govern the object.

 54. Do not use superfluous words.

 55. Use _nor_ with _neither_; and _or_ with _either_.

 56. Do not use _like_ as a conjunctive adverb.

 57. _The one_ refers to the first mentioned; _the other_ to the last
       mentioned.

 58. In giving the number of times the size, &c., one object is that of
       another, use _as-as_, with the positive of the adjective.

 59. Do not use a pronoun so that there will be doubt as to what word is
       its antecedent.

 60. Two different relatives should not be used to refer to the same
       antecedent.


                       Exercises for Correction.

 (=a=) In what (part, portion) of the town does he live (49)?

 (=b=) His face assumed a (deadly, deathly) paleness (49).

 (=c=) He hasn’t no pencil (50).

 (=d=) I differ from you on the tariff question (52).

 (=e=) Why will he permit of such actions (53)?

 (=f=) Where is it at (54)?

 (=g=) On what train did he come on (54)?

 (=h=) Neither the boy or his mother are here (55, 4).

 (=i=) You cannot write like the teacher does (56).

 (=j=) Carthage and Rome were rival powers; the one on the northern coast
        of the Mediterranean, the other on the southern (51, 57).

 (=k=) The weight of the sun is 300,000 times heavier than that of the
        earth (58).

 (=l=) Mary sent her sister back for her shawl which she had forgotten to
        bring (59).

 (=m=) A boy who studies and that improves his spare moments will become
        eminent (60).

 (=n=) Nearly every one of the applicants were from this county (4).

 (=o=) Neither of the workmen have brought their tools (4, 7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                 INSTITUTE LESSONS. Primary Arithmetic.


1. Use each of the numbers (1, 2, 3, 4, &c.) one at a time, and devise
many different ways of illustrating and using each objectively. First,
the perception of the number as a whole—then, the analysis of the
number. Part of the work should involve subtraction.

2. Each number may be illustrated in many ways by large dots variously
grouped on cards. With these cards drill the perception in quickness.
Let each pupil arrange a certain number of “counters” in several ways of
regular form.

3. On each number, ask every possible variety of question. Let the
pupils make problems. Let some be made that are to have a certain given
answer.

4. As each number is used, let its script form be learned and made by
the pupils. After progressing in this way as far as 4 or 5 (some say to
9) teach the figures. Practice counting objects as far as 20.

5. The exercises for slate work should progress very gradually. A higher
number should be introduced only after the pupils can use, with
readiness, those below it, in their many and varied combinations. Let
there be oral work consisting of easy objective problems illustrative of
the slate work.

6. In the black-board work the teacher should use a pointer and call for
ready and correct mental recitations, as he points to the various
problems.

7. The exercises for slate work may be of several different kinds: as,

  (a) 1 and 1 are  .
      2 and 3 are  .
          &c.

  (b) 5 less 1 are  .
      6 less 4 are  .
          &c.

  (c) 2 and   are 6.
        and 1 are 5.

  (d) 6 less   are 5.
        less 2 are 2.

  (e) 1 1 1 2 2
      1 1 2 2 2
      1 2 3 2 3
      _ _ _ _ _

The columns of (e) may contain from three to nine figures. The teacher
must not lengthen them at any time beyond the ability of the pupils.

  (f) 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
      2 1 3 9 4 5 6 8 7
      _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

The upper figure is the same in each: the lower figures are different
and are arranged miscellaneously. In the advancement, increase the upper
row a unit at a time, as far as 11.

8. Teach the use of the signs ×, -, and =, and let the pupils have slate
work similar to the following:—

   8 × 5 =   .
   9 - 6 =   .
      &c.

  12 -   = 4.
  12 -   = 8.
      &c.

     + 6 = 9.
     + 3 = 9.
      &c.

9. Practice counting objects as far as 100, after which drill frequently
in writing and reading the numbers, from the black-board, as far as 100.

10. Use exercises similar to the following:—

  (a)  4  4  4  4
       9 19 29 39 &c.
       _ __ __ __

  (b)  7  7  7  7
       8 68 18 88 &c.
       _ __ __ __

Let every possible combination be learned so well that the result can be
given instantly.

11. For variety, along with the preceding, there may be used exercises
similar to the following:—

  (a)   2  3  2  1
        4  0  1  3
        0  4  3  9
        8  6  4  0
        6  7  6  8
        9  5  7  5
       __ __ __ __

  (b)  2 + 8 + 3 + 7 + 5 =  .
       4 + 9 + 6 + 1 + 3 =  .

  (c)  21  41  22
       32  63  33
       64  63  53
       __  __  __

“Carrying” may now be taught.

12. Practice writing and reading numbers of three, and four, figures.
The pupils at the same time may be given exercises similar to the
following:—

  213
  321
  132
  413
  234
  ___

  769
  758
  897
  786
  594
  ___

Take the last example: the pupil should be taught to _think through it_
rapidly, as follows:—4, 10, 17, 25, 34—write the 4 and carry the 3; 3,
12, 20, 29, 34, 40,—write the 0 and carry the 4; 4, 9, 16, 24, 31, 38;
write the whole result.

13. Let the pupils learn to read numbers as high as millions. For a few
examples, at first, in subtraction, let the numbers in each order of the
minuend be greater than the corresponding ones in the subtrahend; as,

  98
  45
  __

  1364
   631
  ____

  9842
  3512 &c.
  ____

Use practical problems.

14. Next, those examples necessitating “borrowing” or “carrying” may be
given; as,

  137092
   72348
  ______

  6235
  4879
  ____

The method involving “carrying” is the better one. _If equals be added
to two numbers, their difference is not changed._ In the last example,
if 10 is added to 5, to equalize it add 1 to 7, for 10 units of one
order equal one unit of the next higher. Adding the 1 to the 7 is called
“carrying.”

  ··      2 × 1 = 2
  ::      2 × 2 = 4
  :: :    2 × 3 = 6
  :: ::   2 × 4 = 8
         &c. &c.

Let the pupils recite the tables orally. Use for drill the following
problems:—

  987654321
          2
  _________

  123456789
          2
  _________

With the problem on the board let the pupil recite without the aid of
the answer. Similarly use the 3’s, 4’s, 5’s, &c. Along with this part of
the work, how to multiply by a number of two or more figures may be
taught. Placing the multiplication table in the compact rectangular form
found in some arithmetics will be profitable and interesting work.

16. Teach the Roman notation to C; how to tell the time of day; how to
make change with money; and how to solve easy exercises in _pt._, _qt._,
_pk._, and _bu._,—_gi._, _pt._, _qt._, and _gal._—and _in._, _ft._, and
_yd._

17. The teacher, using a pointer, should drill the pupils thoroughly on
the following table. (Try to acquire speed and correctness).

                        2 × 2    3 × 7    8 × 5
                        3 × 2    8 × 3    5 × 9
                        2 × 4    3 × 9    6 × 6
                        5 × 2    4 × 4    7 × 6
                        2 × 6    5 × 4    6 × 8
                        7 × 2    4 × 6    9 × 6
                        2 × 8    7 × 4    7 × 7
                        9 × 2    4 × 8    8 × 7
                        3 × 3    9 × 4    7 × 9
                        4 × 3    5 × 5    8 × 8
                        3 × 5    6 × 5    9 × 8
                        6 × 3    5 × 7    9 × 9

These constitute the multiplication table with the duplicate
combinations cut out, leaving but 36 products to learn in the entire
field of the common multiplication table.

18. Let the division tables now be learned.

  2 into 2 one time     .
  2 into   two times    .
  2 into   three times  .
  2 into   four times   .
  2 into   five times   .
  2 into   six times    .
  2 into   seven times  .
  2 into   eight times  .
  2 into   nine times   .
  2 into   ten times    .

Let the pupils fill the blanks. Let them learn how often 2 is contained
in 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, and 19. Also, when the 3’s, 4’s, etc., are
learned, use the intermediate numbers that give remainders. Drill in
mental work. Give examples after each table is learned; as

  2)563480
  ________

  2)7104239
  _________

Show how to write the remainder fractionally. Teach the meaning of ½, ⅓,
and ¼.

19. Teach long division using easy graded examples.

  15)180(
  25)625(

  13)168(
  50)1150(

  25)400(
  115)32467(

20. Learn the divisors of numbers as high as 100. Method of recitation:
Suppose the lesson consists of the numbers 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

The pupils, with their knowledge of the multiplication table, by
experimental work, and from suggestions by the teacher,—prepare their
slate work as follows:

  The divisors of 24 are 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 12.
  The divisor of 25 is 5.
  The divisors of 26 are 2 and 13.
  The divisors of 27 are 3 and 9.
  The divisors of 28 are 2, 4, 7, and 14.
  29 has no divisors.

In the oral recitation, the first pupil, without referring to his slate,
recites as follows:—

The divisors of 24 are 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 12; 2 twelves are 24, 3 eights
are 24, 4 sixes are 24, 6 fours are 24, 8 threes are 24, and twelve twos
are 24.

The next pupil recites as follows: The divisor of 25 is 5; 5 fives are
25.

The third recites: The divisors of 26 are 2 and 13; 2 thirteens are 26,
13 twos are 26.

The fourth recites: The divisors of 27 are 3 and 9; 3 nines are 27, 9
threes are 27.

The fifth recites: The divisors of 28 are 2, 4, 7, and 14; 2 fourteens
are 28, 4 sevens are 28, 7 fours are 28, and 14 twos are 28.

The sixth recites: 29 has no divisors; it is a prime number—a number
that can be exactly divided only by itself and unity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                   INSTITUTE LESSONS. U. S. History.


Most pupils are slow in learning how to study History. The plan here set
forth will lead them to understand how closely and intently the eyes of
the mind must scan each line, if nothing is to escape their vision.

The teacher selects from the lesson words and expressions indicative of
the prominent ideas, and classifies them into those of _times_,
_places_, _persons_ and _miscellaneous items_; the most _difficult
words_, for “dictionary work”; and _general topics_, of which the
preceding divisions are analytic elements. These elements thoroughly
learned, recited, and properly combined bring into use, language and
understanding to help form a foundation for mastering and reciting the
general topics. The teacher’s analysis is placed upon the board. From
this (or a copy of their own) the pupils may prepare the lesson. First,
the pupil is to read (study) his lesson through once or twice, and then
test his work by noting how many of the _elements_ of the lesson he can
“recite.” To recite an element, a pupil states how (or why) the author
has used it, or in what connection it occurs in the lesson. If it
denotes a _person_ to tell who he was; if a _place_ to tell where it is;
&c.

This recitation is necessarily short, but it brings into use language
and understanding to form a foundation for mastering and reciting the
general topics.

  _Model for Teacher._ From the First Five Paragraphs of the Eclectic
        U. S. History.

  TIMES.—400 yrs.

  PLACES.—American continent, Mississippi River, Great Lakes, four
        cities, Mexico, Yucatan, Adams Co., O., Marietta, Mississippi
        Valley, Central America, Atlantic, Iceland.

  PERSONS.—Tribes, mound-builders, Frenchmen, Indians, ancestors,
        sailors.

  MISCELLANEOUS.—Dark-skinned hunters, an empty continent,
        burial-mounds, 164 ft., 5000 people, island of frost and flame.

  DICTIONARY WORK.—Wigwams, area, maize, bananas, tropical, solitary,
        basins. (Give meaning, and tell how each happens to be used.)

  GENERAL TOPICS.—A Lonely Land, The Mound-builders, Wares from Ancient
        Workshops, Origin of the Early Inhabitants of America.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                    U. S. HISTORY.—MEN AND MEASURES.


                1801.  Fourth Presidential Term.  1805.

              FEDERAL.             │           REPUBLICAN.
                                 18│01
                                   │
 =Pres. Jefferson= called an       │=Thom. Jefferson=______=Pres.=
 atheist; a fanatic in politics;   │=Aaron Burr=______=Vice Pres.=
 and his party called              │
 disorganizers and revolutionists. │  _Simple Ceremonials._
                                   │  _Lenient towards France._
                                   │  _Hostile towards Eng._
                                   │
                                7th│C.
                                   │
                                   │Reduction in the army, navy,
                                   │  taxes, and duties.
                                   │
                                   │Nat. Law of ’95 restored.
                                   │
                                 18│02
                                   │
 Unsuccessful attempt to fasten a  │  Judiciary Law repealed.
   charge of mismanagement upon the│
   Treasury Department.            │Unsuccessful attempt to abolish
                                   │  the “Mint.”
                                   │
                                   │The “_Burrites_” a faction of the
                                   │  Reps.
                                   │
                                 18│03
                                   │
 Some of the Feds. contemplate } __│__ { =Purchase of La.=
   “Secession.”                }   │   {
                                   │
                                8th│C.
                                   │
                                   │  French Treaty ratified.
                                   │
                                 18│04
                                   │
                                   │  Judge Chase impeached.
                                   │
      Opp. by New Eng. members ____│____ XIIth Amend. passed.
                                   │
                       Presidential Candidates.
                                   │
    =C. C. Pinckney & R. King= ____│____ =Jefferson & Geo. Clinton=
                                   │
                Presidential Election; 17 States vote.
                                   │
      Elec. Vote:—P. & K. (14) ____│____ J. & C. (162).
                                   │
 The Federals espouse the cause of │Trial of Judge Chase,
   Judge Chase, who is acquitted.  │               Burr presiding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


               1793.   Second Presidential Term.   1797.

              FEDERAL.             │           DEMOCRATIC.
                                   │           REPUBLICAN.
                                 17│93
                                   │
 =Geo. Washington.= Pres.          │
 =John Adams=, V. Pres.            │
                                   │
   Trouble with France.            │
                                   │
 Neutrality Proclamation. _________│____ Opposed, as nullifying Treaty
                                   │  of 1778, with Fr.
 The treaty regarded as nullified  │
   by the change of government     │“Democratic Clubs” encourage Genet
   in France.                      │  and denounce Wash.
                                   │
                                3rd│C.
                                   │
           BRITISH PARTY.          │          FRENCH PARTY.
                                   │
                                   │=Jeff.= leaves the Cabinet,
                                   │  Dec. 31.
                                   │
                                 17│94
                                   │
 Embargo, 60d.                     │Friendly to Fr.; hostile to Eng.
                                   │
 =Jay= app. E. E. to Eng.          │
                                   │
       Indirect taxation voted ____│____ Opposed; direct tax favored.
                                   │
                                   │XIth Amend. passed.
                                   │
                                   │      =Whisky Insurrection.=
                                   │
                                 17│95
                                   │
 =Hamilton= resigns.               │
                                   │
                        Debate on Jay’s Treaty.
                                   │
 Jay’s Treaty ratified.            │=Jay= hung in Effigy.
                                   │
 Naturalization Law.               │=Washington= accused of incapacity
                                   │  and embezzlement, and
                                   │  called the “Stepfather of his
                                   │  Country!”
                                   │
                                4th│C.
                                   │
                                 17│96
                                   │
 Pres. Proc. legalizing Jay’s      │An increase of duties successfully
   Treaty.                         │  opposed.
                                   │
 House Resolution for carrying     │
   Treaty into effect; another     │
   debate.                         │
                                   │
                =Fisher Ames.= ____│____ =Albert Gallatin.=
                                   │
 Washington’s “Farewell Address.”  │Party name shortened to
                                   │           REPUBLICAN.
                                   │
 The _Federals_ claim to be—       │The _Republicans_ claim to be—
   (_a_) The authors of the Gov.   │  (_a_) The advocates of economy.
   (_b_) The friends of neutrality,│  (_b_) The friends of liberty and
           peace, and prosperity.  │          of the rights of man.
   (_c_) The direct inheritors of  │  (_c_) The protectors of the
           Washington’s policy.    │          rights of the States.
                                   │
                       Presidential Candidates.
                                   │
    =John Adams=; =T. Pinckney=.   │  =T. Jefferson=; =Aaron Burr=.
                                   │
   Presidential Election; 16 States vote; 1st Presidential contest.
                                   │
   Elec. Vote:—A. (71); P. (59) ___│___ J. (68); B. (30).

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                1797.   Third Presidential Term.   1801.

              FEDERAL.             │           REPUBLICAN.
                                 17│97
                                   │
      =John Adams=, President.     │    =Thomas Jefferson=, V. P.
                                   │
                                5th│C.
                                   │
 President’s Address to Cong.      │
 Envoys sent to France.            │
 Treaties with Fr. annulled.       │
                                 17│98
                                   │
 =X. Y. Z.= letters published.     │
                                   │
         Preparations for war. ____│____ Vehement protestations
                                   │       against war measures.
 Naturalization Law made more      │
   rigid.                          │
 The “=Alien Law=.” ______________ │} ___ Opposed as violations of the
 The “=Sedition Law=.” ___________ │}       1st Amend.
                                   │
                                   │   =Ky. Resolutions= (=Jeff.=)
                                   │   =Vir. Resolutions= (=Mad.=)
                                   │
                                 17│99
                                   │
 Three Envoys sent to Fr.          │  Ky.’s Null. Resolutions.
                                   │
 Quarrel between Adams & Ham.      │
                                   │
                                 18│00
                                   │
 Treaty with Napoleon,             │  N. Y. elects a Rep. legislature.
        September 17, 1800.        │
                                   │Caucus nomination of presidential
 The Federals claim to be the      │  candidates.
   authors of the Government; the  │
   friends of neutrality, peace,   │Republican Platform:—Free Speech,
   and prosperity; and the direct  │  Religion, Press, Trade.
   inheritors of Washington’s      │
   policy.                         │No Standing Army. Specie Currency.
                                   │  Liberal Nat. Laws. State Sov.
                                   │  Economy. Strict Construction of
                                   │  the Constitution.
                                   │
                       Presidential Candidates.
                                   │
   =J. Adams=; =C. C. Pinckney=.   │    =T. Jefferson=; =A. Burr=.
                                   │
       Presidential election; 16 States vote; partisan contest.
                                   │
 Elec. vote:—A. (65); P. (64) _____│____ J. (73); B. (73).
                                   │
            The undecided election causes much excitement.
                                   │
       Many Feds. favor Burr.      │
                                   │
             House Votes:—Burr, 4;  Jeff., 10; two blanks.
                                   │
       Judiciary Law enacted.      │         Opposed, (why?)

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                1789.   First Presidential Term.   1793.

              FEDERAL.             │          ANTI-FEDERAL.
                                 17│89
                                   │
   =Geo. Washington, Pres.=        │
   =John Adams, V. P.=             │
                                   │
            { =Alex. Hamilton= ____│____ =Thom. Jefferson.=
   Cabinet: { =Henry Knox= ________│____ =Edmund Randolph.=
                                   │
        PROMINENT FEDERALS.        │       PROMINENT ANTI-FEDS.
                                   │
   =John Jay=, =Ben. Franklin=,    │  =Patrick Henry=, =Albert
 =Rufus King=, =Gouverneur         │Gallatin=, =Geo. Clinton=,
 Morris=, =Roger Sherman=,         │=Jam. Monroe=, =Geo. Mason=,
 =Robt. Morris=, =C. C. Pinckney=, │=John Hancock=, =Elbridge
 =John Marshall=, =Jam. Wilson=,   │Gerry=, =Aaron Burr=, =Sam.
 =Jam. Madison=.                   │Adams=, =R. H. Lee=.
                                   │
                                1st│C.
                                   │
 Protective Tariff Bill passed.    │    =F. M. Muhlenberger, Sp.=
                                   │
                                   │Ten Amendments adopted.
                                   │
                                   │N. C. enters the Union, Nov.
                                   │
                                 17│90
                                   │
      =Assumption Bill passed= ____│____ Opposed, as destructive of
                                   │      State Supremacy.
                                   │
                                   │R. I. enters the Union, May.
                                   │
                                 17│91
                                   │
 National Bank chartered.          │=James Madison= sides with the
                                   │  Anti-Feds.
                                   │
             Excise Law Passed ____│____ Opposed violently, especially
                                   │      in Western Pa.
                                   │
           Stormy Sectional Debate in the House, on Slavery.
                                   │
                                2nd│C.
                                   │
 =Jonathan Trumbull=, of Conn.,    │
   Sp.                             │
                                   │
                                 17│92
                                   │
 Army and Tariff increased ________│____ Anti-Feds charge the Feds
                                   │      with aiming at Monarchy.
                                   │
                                   │      Party name changed to
                                   │     =Democratic-Republican=.
                                   │
                       Presidential Candidates.
                                   │
    =Washington=; =John Adams=.    │  ____________; =Geo. Clinton=.
                                   │
   Presidential Election; 15 States vote; contest only on Vice Pres.
                                   │
                                 17│93
                                   │
 Elec. Vote:—W. (132); A. (77) ___ │____________ C. (50).
                                   │
               First Fugitive Slave Law passed, Feb. 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: oil lamp shining on paper scroll, pen and ink]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fifteen Institute Lessons in Language,
Arithmetic, and U.S. History, by W. F. L. Sanders

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTEEN INSTITUTE LESSONS ***

***** This file should be named 52429-0.txt or 52429-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/4/2/52429/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, ellinora and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

